The Project Gutenberg eBook of Psyche: The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Psyche: The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks

Author: Erwin Rohde

Translator: W. B. Hillis

Release date: October 17, 2021 [eBook #66555]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Ed Brandon from material at the Internet Archive


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PSYCHE: THE CULT OF SOULS AND BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY AMONG THE GREEKS ***

Psyche

The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks


By

ERWIN ROHDE



LONDON
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., LTD.
NEW YORK: HARCOURT, BRACE & COMPANY, INC.
1925



Translated from the eighth edition by

W. B. HILLIS. M.A.


_Printed in Great Britain by Stephen Austin & Sons, Ltd., Hertford._



CONTENTS


                                                                PAGE.


      PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  VII
      PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   XI
      PRELIMINARY NOTE TO THE SEVENTH AND EIGHTH EDITION         XIII
      TRANSLATOR'S NOTE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   XV

PART I

CHAP.
   I. BELIEFS ABOUT THE SOUL AND CULT OF SOULS IN THE HOMERIC
           POEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
  II. ISLANDS OF THE BLEST. _Translation_      . . . . . . . . .   55
 III. CAVE DEITIES. SUBTERRANEAN _Translation_       . . . . . .   88
  IV. HEROES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  115
   V. THE CULT OF SOULS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  156
             I.  Cult of Chthonic Deities  . . . . . . . . . . .  158
            II.  Funeral ceremonies and worship of the dead  . .  162
           III.  Traces of the Cult of Souls in the Blood Feud
                      and Satisfaction for murder  . . . . . . .  174
  VI. THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  217
 VII. IDEAS OF THE FUTURE LIFE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  236

PART II

VIII. ORIGINS OF THE BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY. THE THRACIAN WORSHIP
           OF DIONYSOS   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  253
  IX. DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE. ITS AMALGAMATION WITH
           APOLLINE RELIGION. ECSTATIC PROPHECY. RITUAL
           PURIFICATION AND EXORCISM. ASCETICISM . . . . . . . .  282
   X. THE ORPHICS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  335
  XI. THE PHILOSOPHERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  362
 XII. THE LAY AUTHORS (LYRIC POETS--PINDAR--THE TRAGEDIANS)  . .  411
{vi}
XIII. PLATO  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  463
 XIV. THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD . . . . . . . . . . . . .  490
            I. Philosophy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  490
           II. Popular Belief  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  524

APPENDIX
   I. Consecration of persons struck by lightning  . . . . . . .  581
  II. ~maschalismo/s~  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  582
 III. ~amu/êtoi, a/gamoi~, Danaids in the lower world  . . . . .  586
  IV. The Tetralogies of Antiphon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  588
   V. Ritual Purification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  588
  VI. Hekate and the ~Hekatika\ pha/smata~ . . . . . . . . . . .  590
 VII. The Hosts of Hekate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  593
VIII. Disintegration of Consciousness and Reduplication of
           Personality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  595
  IX. The Great Orphic Theogony  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  596
   X. Previous Lives of Pythagoras. His Descent to Hades . . . .  598
  XI. Initiation considered as Adoption by the god . . . . . . .  601
 XII. Magical Exorcisms of the Dead  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  603


{{vii}}

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


THIS book offers an account of the opinions held by the Greeks about
the life of the human soul after death, and is thus intended as a
contribution to the history of Greek religion. Such an undertaking
has in a special measure to contend with the difficulties that face
any inquiry into the religious life and thought of the Greeks. Greek
religion was a natural growth, not a special foundation, and the
ideas and feelings which gave it its inward tone and outward shape
never received abstract formulation. It expressed itself in
religious performances alone: it had no sacred books from which we
might determine the inward meaning and interconnexion of the ideas
with which the Greeks approached the gods created by their faith.
The central essence of the religion held by the Greek people, in
spite of this absence of conceptual formulation--or perhaps because
of it--preserved its original character to a remarkable degree: the
speculations and fancies of Greek poets continually refer to this
central nucleus. Indeed the poets and philosophers in such of their
writings as have come down to us are our only authorities for the
religious thought of the Greeks. In the present inquiry they have
naturally had to be our guides for the greater part of the way. But
though under the special conditions of Greek life the religious
views of poets and philosophers represent an important side of Greek
religion, they yet allow us to perceive very clearly the independent
and self-determined position with regard to the ancestral religion
retained by the individual. The individual believer might always, if
his own temper and disposition allowed him, give himself up to the
plain and unsophisticated emotions which had shaped and decided the
faith of the people and the religious performances of popular
~euse/beia~. But we should know very little of the religious ideas
that filled the mind of the believing Greek if we had to do without
the evidence of philosophers and poets (and of some Attic orators as
well) in whose words dumb and inarticulate emotion finds expression.
The inquirer would, however, be entirely on the wrong track {viii}
and be led to some remarkable conclusions who ventured without more
ado to deduce from the religious ideas that find expression in Greek
literature a complete Theology of the Greek _people_. Where direct
literary statements and allusions fail us we are left with nothing
but surmises in face of the religion of the Greeks and its inmost
guiding forces. Of course there are plenty of people of sanguine
temperament and industrious fancy who find no difficulty in
producing for our benefit the most admirable solutions of the
problem. Others in varying degrees of good faith press the emotions
of Christian piety into the service of explaining ancient faith in
gods. Thus injustice is done to both forms of religion and an
understanding of the essentials of Greek belief in its true and
independent reality is made completely impossible. A good example of
this is provided by the Eleusinian Mysteries, and by that favourite
topic of controversy (which has, indeed, received more than its due
share of attention from students of religion), the amalgamation of
the worship of gods and the belief in Souls said to have taken place
therein. Nowhere else has the complete unprofitableness of the
attempt to make use of the shifting ideas and tendencies of modern
civilization to explain the underlying motive forces of these
significant cult practices, been more strikingly and repeatedly
demonstrated. On this head in particular the author of the present
work has renounced all attempts to cast a fitful and ambiguous light
upon the venerable gloom of the subject by the help of the farthing
dip of his own private imaginings. There is no denying that here as
in so many departments of ancient ~euse/beia~ there is something
greater and finer that eludes our grasp. The revealing word, never
having been written down, has been lost. Instead of trying to find a
substitute in modern catch phrases it seems better simply to
describe, in the plainest and most literal fashion, the actual
phenomena of Greek piety exactly as they are known to us. There will
be plenty of opportunity for the author's own suggestions and they
need not always obtrude themselves. The aim of this work is to make
plain the facts of the Greek _Cult of Souls_ and of that belief in
immortality the inner workings of which are only partially
intelligible to our most sympathetic efforts to understand them. To
give a clearer presentation of the origin and development of those
practices and those beliefs; to distinguish the transformations
through which they passed and their relationship with other and
kindred intellectual tendencies; to disentangle the many different
lines of thought and speculation from the inextricable {ix}
confusion in which they lie in many minds (and in many books) and to
let them stand out clearly and distinctly one from another, seemed
particularly desirable. Why this design has not been carried out by
the same methods throughout; why it has sometimes seemed sufficient
to give a bald summary of the essential points, while at other times
certain topics are pursued into their most distant ramifications
(sometimes with apparently irrelevant prolixity), will be obvious
enough to those who are familiar with the subject. Where a more
careful examination of the overflowing mass of detail was to be
attempted advantage has been taken of the Appendix to achieve a
greater, though still only a relative degree of completeness. This
was made possible by the lengthy period which elapsed between the
publication of the two parts of the book. The first half [to the end
of chapter vii] appeared as long ago as the spring of 1890.
Unpropitious circumstances have delayed the completion of the
remainder till the present moment. The two parts could easily be
kept separate (as they have been): in the main they fall apart and
correspond to the two sides of the question indicated in the title
of the book--Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality. The Cult of
Souls and the faith in immortality may eventually come together at
some points, but they have a different origin and travel most of the
way on separate paths. The conception of immortality in particular
arises from a spiritual intuition which reveals the souls of men as
standing in close relationship, and indeed as being of like
substance, with the everlasting gods. And simultaneously the gods
are regarded as being in their nature like the soul of man, i.e. as
free spirits needing no material or visible body. (It is this
spiritualized view of the gods--not the belief in gods itself as
Aristotle supposes in the remarkable statement quoted by Sextus
Empiricus Adv. Mathematicos, iii, 20 ff.--which arises from the
vision of its own divine nature achieved by the soul ~kath'
heautê/n~ relieved of the body, in ~enthousiasmoi/~ and
~mantei=ai~.) And this conception leads far away from the ideas on
which the Cult of Souls was based.

The publication of the book in two parts has brought with it a
regrettable circumstance for which I must ask the indulgence of
well-disposed readers (that the first half found so many of them is
a fact which I must gratefully acknowledge). As the dimensions of the
whole work grew beyond expectation and almost overstepped the
~me/tron au/tarkes~, the sixteen excursuses which were promised in
{x} the first volume have had to be dropped: the book would
otherwise have been overloaded. So far as they possess independent
interest they will find a place elsewhere. They are real excursuses
and were intended as such, and the proper understanding of the book
will not be affected by their absence.

ERWIN ROHDE.

HEIDELBERG.
_November 1st, 1893._


{{xi}}

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


THE publication of a second edition of this book affords me a
welcome opportunity of making my account more exact and to the point
in certain places; of adding some points that had been overlooked or
omitted; and of noticing with approval or disapproval some divergent
opinions that had obtained currency in the interval. Controversy is,
however, confined within the narrowest limits and to points of minor
importance (and only then in answer to more serious and significant
objections). The plan and--if I may say so--the style of the whole
book demanded throughout, and more especially in the great points at
issue, a purely positive statement of my own views and the results
of my own studies. Such a statement, it may well be imagined, was
not arrived at without being preceded in the mind of the author by a
controversial reckoning with the manifold views and doctrines of
others upon the subjects here dealt with--views which in some cases
he felt obliged to reject. Controversy in this sense lies behind
every page of the book, though as a rule only in a latent condition.
In this condition I have been content to let it remain in this
revised edition of the book. My opinions were not arrived at without
toil and much careful reflection; one view being made to reinforce
another till they were all bound together in a single
closely-knitted whole. Neither further reflection on my part nor the
criticisms of others have shaken my belief in the tenability of
opinions reached in this way. I have therefore ventured to leave my
account unaltered in all its main points. I hope that it contains
its own justification and defence in itself without further
vindication on my part.

Nothing in the plan or execution of the whole or its parts has been
altered; neither have I taken anything away. The book contained
nothing that was superfluous to the attainment of the object that I
had in view. This object, it will be apparent, was not in the least
to provide a brief and compendious statement of the most
indispensable facts about the cult of Souls and the belief in
immortality among the Greeks for the benefit of those who wished to
take a hasty {xii} glance over the subject. Such a hasty picker-up
of knowledge who regards himself--I cannot imagine why--as
peculiarly fitted to criticise my book, has ingenuously besought me,
in view of a second edition which he was kind enough to think
probable, to throw overboard most of what he considered the
superfluous parts of the book. With this request I have not felt
myself able to comply. My book was written for maturer readers who
have passed beyond the school stage and look for something more than
an elementary handbook, and who would be able to understand and
appreciate the plan and intention which led me to draw my material
so widely from many departments of literary and cultural history.
The first edition of the book found many such readers: I may hope
and expect that the second will do the same.

In its revised form the book has been divided for the convenience of
those who use it into two volumes (which correspond with the two
parts in which it was first published). I was urged to take away the
notes that stand at the foot of the text and relegate them to a
place by themselves in a separate appendix. I found, however, that I
could not bring myself to adopt this fashionable modern practice,
which so far as I have experience of it in books published in recent
years seems to me to be inconvenient and to hinder rather than help
that undisturbed appreciation of the text which such an arrangement
is intended to serve. Independent readers who in using the book are
working out the subject for themselves would certainly not desire
the separation of the documentary evidence from the statement of the
author's view. The book has also, to my peculiar satisfaction,
attracted a large number of readers from outside the immediate
circle of professional philologists. Such readers have evidently not
been seriously disturbed by the elaborate and perhaps rather
pedantic aspect of the mysterious disquisitions at the foot of the
page, and have been able to fix their attention upon the clearer
language of the text above. I have therefore decided to remove a few
only of the notes which had grown to independent dimensions to an
appendix at the end of each of the two volumes.

ERWIN ROHDE.

HEIDELBERG.
_November 27th, 1897._


{{xiii}}

PRELIMINARY NOTE TO THE SEVENTH AND EIGHTH EDITIONS


IN supervising together this reprint of "Psyche" we have found
ourselves faced with the question which Schöll and Dieterich had to
decide in bringing out the third edition--whether changes or
additions would be admissible. It went without saying that the text
must remain untouched in the form last given to it by Rohde's own
hand. Nor was it possible to make any additions to the notes without
seriously disturbing the carefully considered architecture of the
whole book. It would have been more possible to add an appendix or
supplementary pamphlet recording the literature of the subject which
has appeared since 1898 and giving an account of the present state
of the questions dealt with by Rohde: as has been done with the
"Griechische Roman" by W. Schmid. But on making the attempt we soon
found that the problem was a different one in the case of "Psyche"
with which (much more than in the other case) all subsequent study of
the history of religion as pursued by all nations has had to reckon,
and from which such study has in no small degree taken its starting
point. We have therefore refrained; and we have also refrained from
remodelling the citations to make them correspond with critical
editions that have since appeared. This process could not be carried
through without, in some places, introducing contradictions with
Rohde's interpretation that would have necessitated more detailed
discussion. Rohde's own method of citation was only seriously
inconvenient in the case of Euripides: here he evidently, as we
observed from about the middle of the first volume onwards, made use
of more than one edition at the same time, and has consequently
quoted lines in accordance with different enumerations. For the
greater assurance and convenience of the reader the lines are
uniformly referred to according to the numbering of Nauck. This task
has been undertaken by our devoted helper Frl. Emilie Boer, who has
also verified, with a very few exceptions, the whole of the
references to ancient writers and inscriptions; {xiv} a considerable
number of errors missed by the author or later editors have thus
been corrected. The minor changes introduced in the third and
following editions--the recording on the margin of the pagination of
the first edition and the valuable enlargement of the index due to
W. Nestle with the assistance of O. Crusius--have all naturally been
retained.

F. BOLL. O. WEINREICH.

HEIDELBERG.
_November, 1920._


{{xv}}

TRANSLATOR'S NOTE


ROHDE is very unsystematic in his mode of quoting from ancient
authorities: he has, for example, four different ways of referring
to the Iliad and the Odyssey, two of referring to Demosthenes and
the Orators, etc. In quoting from the lesser authorities he
sometimes used editions which have since become antiquated. (He even
goes so far as to quote Clem. Alex. by the page and letter of
Heinsius' re-edition of Sylburg.) I have made an attempt to reduce
the number of inconsistencies and to give references where possible
to modern editions. In these and other small ways I have tried to
make the notes--the text I hope is intelligible enough--more
accessible to English readers. I have given references to English
translations of German works (where I have been able to find them);
but I have refrained from adding references to the modern literature
of the subject: most readers of the book will prefer to do that for
themselves. In order to save space I have used abbreviation pretty
freely in quoting names of authors and titles of books. The
abbreviated forms agree generally with those given in Liddell and
Scott (supplemented by the list drawn up for the new edition of the
Lexicon): most of the following may be noted:--

A. (or Aesch.)   = Aeschylus.
Amm.             = Ammonius.
_AP._            = _Anthologia Palatina_.
Apollod.         = Ps.-Apollodorus, _Bibiotheca_ (unless _Epit._ is
                    added).
A. R.            = Apollonius Rhodius.
_Ath. Mitth._    = _Mittheilungen d. deutsch. arch. Inst. zu Athen_.
Aug.             = Augustine.
D. (or Dem.)     = Demosthenes.
D. C.            = Dio Cassius.
D. Chr.          = Dio Chrysostom.
D. H.            = Dionysius of Halicarnassus (i.e. _Rom. Antiq._
                    unless otherwise indicated)
D. L.            = Diogenes Laertius.
D. P.            = Dionysius Periegetes.
D. S.            = Diodorus Siculus.
E. (or Eur.)     = Euripides.
_Epigr. Gr._     = Kaibel, _Epigrammata Graeca_.
Eun.             = Eunapius _Vitae Sophistarum_. {xvi}
Gal.             = Galen (vol. and page of Kühn).
_GDI._           = Collitz, _Griechische Dialektinschriften_.
**_Gp._          = _Geoponica_.
Grimm            = Grimm, _Deutsche Mythologie_ transl. as _Teutonic
                    Mythology_, by J. S. Stallybrass, Lond., 1880.
Heraclid. _Pol._ = Heraclides Ponticus, _Politica_.
Him.             = Himerius.
Hipp.            = Hippolytus.
Hp.              = Hippokrates.
Hsch.            = Hesychius.
H. Smyrn.        = Hermippus of Smyrna.
Homer is quoted by the majuscules of the Greek alphabet for the books
of the Iliad, by the minuscules for the Odyssey.
_Inscr. Perg._   = _Inschriften von Pergamon_ ed. Fraenkel.
_IPE._           = _Inscriptiones Ponti Euxini_ ed. Latyschev.
Is.              = Isaeus.
J. M.            = Justin Martyr.
_Leg. Sacr._     = von Prott and Ziehen, _Leges Graecorum Sacrae_.
Pall.            = Palladius, _de Re Rustica_.
Phld.            = Philodemus.
Pi.              = Pindar.
Pl.              = Plato.
_PLG._           = Bergk, _Poetae Lyrici Graeci_ ed. 4.
Plot.            = Plotinus.
Plu.             = Plutarch.
_PMagPar._       = Paris Magical Papyrus ed. Wessely.
_Rh. Mus._       = _**Rheinisches Museum_.
S. (or Soph.)    = Sophokles.
S. E.            = Sextus Empiricus.
_SIG._           = Dittenberger, _Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum_
                    ed. 2 (unless otherwise stated).
Str.             = Strabo (Casaubon's page).
_Tab. Defix._    = _Tabellae Defixionum_ ed. Wünsch (Appendix to
                    _CIA_.).
Thphr.           = Theophrastus (_Ch._ = _Characters_ ed. Jebb).
Tylor            = E. B. Tylor, _Primitive Culture_ ed. 4.
Tz.              = Tzetzes.
Vg.              = Vergil.
_Vors._          = Diels, _Fragmente der Vorsokratiker_ ed. 4 (vol. 1
                    unless otherwise indicated).
X. (or Xen.)     = Xenophon historicus.
Znb.             = Zenobius.

I take this opportunity of thanking my friend Mr. R. Burn, of
Glasgow University, for his invaluable help in these matters.

W. B. HILLIS.




PART I


{{3}}

CHAPTER I

BELIEFS ABOUT THE SOUL AND CULT OF SOULS IN THE HOMERIC POEMS

I

§ 1

To the immediate understanding of mankind nothing seems so
self-evident, nothing so little in need of explanation, as the
phenomenon of Life itself, the fact of man's own existence. On the
other hand, the cessation of this so self-evident existence,
whenever it obtrudes itself upon his notice, arouses man's
ever-renewed astonishment. There are primitive peoples to whom death
whenever it occurs seems an arbitrary abbreviation of life: if it is
not due to visible forces, then some invisible magic must have
caused it. So difficult is it for such peoples to grasp the idea
that the present state of being alive and conscious can come to an
end of its own accord.

Once reflection on such problems is aroused, life itself, standing
as it does on the threshold of all sensation and experience, soon
begins to appear no less mysterious than death--that kingdom into
which no experience reaches. It may even come about that when they
are regarded too long and too hard, light and darkness seem to
change places. It was to a Greek poet that the question suggested
itself: "Who knows then whether Life be not Death, and what we here
call Death be called Life there below?"

From such jaded wisdom and its doubts Greek civilization is still
far removed when, though already at an advanced stage in its
development, it first speaks to us in the Homeric poems. The poet
and his heroes speak with lively feeling of the pains and troubles
of life, both in its individual phases and as a whole. The gods have
allotted a life of pain and misery to men, while they themselves
remain free from care. On the other hand, to turn aside from life
altogether never enters the head of anyone in Homer. Nothing may be
said expressly of the joy and happiness of life, but that is because
such things {4} go without saying among a vigorous folk engrossed in
a movement of progress, whose circumstances were never complicated
and where all the conditions of happiness easily fell to the lot of
the strong in activity and enjoyment. And, indeed, it is only for
the strong, the prudent, and the powerful that this Homeric world is
intended. Life and existence upon this earth obviously belongs to
them--is it not an indispensable condition of the attainment of all
particular good things? As for death--the state which is to follow
our life here--there is no danger of anyone mistaking _that_ for
life. "Do not try and explain away death to me," says Achilles to
Odysseus in Hades; and this would be the answer any Homeric man
would have given to the sophisticated poet, if he had tried to
persuade him that the state of things after life on this earth is
the real life. Nothing is so hateful to man as death and the gates
of Hades: for when death comes it is certain that life--this sweet
life of ours in the sunlight--is done with, whatever else there may
be to follow.

§ 2

But what _does_ follow? What happens when life departs for ever from
the inanimate body?

It is strange that anyone should have maintained (as it has been in
recent times[1\1]) that in any stage of the development of the
Homeric poems the belief can be found that with the moment of death
all is at an end: that nothing survives death. We are not warranted
by any statement in either of the two poems (to be found perhaps in
their oldest parts, as is suggested) nor yet by the tell-tale
silence of the poet, in attributing such an idea either to the poet
or his contemporaries. Wherever the occasion of death is described
we are told how the dead man (still referred to by his name, or his
"Psyche", hastens away into the house of Aïdes--into the kingdom of
Aïdes and the grim Persephoneia; goes down to the darkness below the
earth, to Erebos; or, more vaguely, sinks into the earth itself. In
any case, it is no mere _nothing_ that can enter the gloomy depths,
nor over what does not exist could one suppose that the divine Pair
holds sway below.

But how are we to think of this "Psyche" that, unnoticed during the
lifetime of the body, and only observable when it is "separated"
from the body, now glides off to join the multitude of its kind
assembled in the murky regions of the "Invisible" (Aïdes)? Its name,
like the names given to the {5} "soul" in many languages, marks it
off as something airy and breathlike, revealing its presence in the
breathing of the living man. It escapes out of the mouth--or out of
the gaping wound of the dying--and now freed from its prison
becomes, as the name well expresses it, an "image" (~ei/dôlon~). On
the borders of Hades Odysseus sees floating "the images of those
that have toiled (on earth)". These immaterial images withdrawing
themselves from the grasp of the living, like smoke (_Il._ xxiii,
100) or a shadow (_Od._ xi, 207; x, 495), must at least recognizably
present the general outlines of the once living person. Odysseus
immediately recognizes his mother, Antikleia, in such a
shadow-person, as well as the lately dead Elpenor, and those of his
companions of the Trojan War who have gone before him. The psyche of
Patroklos appearing to Achilleus by night resembles the dead man
absolutely in stature, bodily appearance and expression. The nature
of this shadowy double of mankind, separating itself from man in
death and taking its departure then, can best be realized if we
first make clear to ourselves what qualities it does _not_ possess.
The psyche of Homeric belief does not, as might have been supposed,
represent what we are accustomed to call "spirit" as opposed to
"body". All the faculties of the human "spirit" in the widest
sense--for which the poet has a large and varied vocabulary--are
indeed only active and only possible so long as a man is still
alive: when death comes the complete personality is no longer in
existence. The body, that is the corpse, now becomes mere "senseless
earth" and falls to pieces, while the psyche remains untouched. But
the latter is by no means the refuge of "spirit" and its faculties,
any more than the corpse is. It (the psyche) is described as being
without feeling, deserted by mind and the organs of mind. All power
of will, sensation, and thought have vanished with the
disintegration of the individual man into his component parts. So
far from it being permissible to ascribe the functions of "spirit"
to the psyche, it would be more reasonable to speak of a contrast
between the two. Man is a living creature, conscious of himself and
intelligently active, only so long as the psyche remains within him.
But it is not the psyche which communicates its own faculties to man
and gives him capacity for life together with consciousness, will
and knowledge. It is rather that during the union of the psyche and
the body all the faculties of living and acting lie within the
empire of the body, of which they are functions. Without the
presence of the psyche, the body cannot perceive, feel, or will, but
it does not use these {6} or any of its faculties through or by
means of the psyche. Nowhere does Homer attribute any such function
to the psyche in living man: it is, in fact, only mentioned when its
separation from the living man is imminent or has occurred. As the
body's shadow-image it survives the body and all its vital powers.

If we now ask--as our Homeric psychologists generally do--which, in
the face of this mysterious association between a living body and
its counterfeit the psyche, is the "real" man, we find that Homer in
fact gives contradictory answers. Not infrequently (indeed, in the
first lines of the Iliad) the material body is contrasted,[2\1] as
the "man himself", with the psyche--which cannot therefore be any
organ or component part of the living body. On the other hand, that
which takes its departure at death and hastens into the realm of
Hades is also referred to by the proper name of the person as
"himself"[3\1]--which means that here the shadowy psyche (for
nothing else can go down to Hades) is invested with the name and
value of the complete personality, the "self" of the man. But those
who draw from these phrases the conclusion that either the body or
the psyche must be the "real man" have, in either case,[4\1] left
out of account or unexplained one half of the recorded evidence.
Regarded without prejudice, these apparently contradictory methods
of speaking simply prove that both the visible man (the body and its
own faculties) _and_ the indwelling psyche could be described as the
man's "self". According to the Homeric view, human beings exist
twice over: once as an outward and visible shape, and again as an
invisible "image" which only gains its freedom in death. This, and
nothing else, is the Psyche.

Such an idea--that the psyche should dwell with the living and fully
conscious personality, like an alien and a stranger, a feebler
double of the man, as his "other self"--this may well seem very
strange to us. And yet this is what so-called "savage" peoples,[5\1]
all over the world, actually believe. Herbert Spencer in particular
has shown this most decisively. It is therefore not very surprising
to find the Greeks, too, sharing a mode of thought that lies so
close to the mind of primitive mankind. The earlier age which handed
down to the Greeks of Homer their beliefs about the soul cannot have
failed any more than other nations to observe the facts upon which a
fantastic logic based the conclusion of man's double personality. It
was not the phenomena of sensation, will, perception, or thought in
waking and conscious man which led to this conclusion. It was the
experience of an apparent {7} double of the self in dreaming, in
swoons, and ecstasy, that gave rise to the inference of a two-fold
principle of life in man, and of the existence of an independent,
separable "second self" dwelling within the viable self of daily
life. One has only to listen to the words of a Greek writer of a
later period who, far more explicitly than Homer, describes the
nature of the psyche and at the same time lets us see the origin of
the belief in such an entity. Pindar (fr. 131) tells us that the
body obeys Death, the almighty, but the image of the living creature
lives on ("since this alone is derived from the gods": which, of
course, is not Homeric belief); for it (this _eidôlon_) is
_sleeping_ when the limbs are active, but when the body is asleep it
often reveals the future in a dream. Words could hardly make it
plainer that in the activities of the waking and conscious man, the
image-soul has no part. Its world is the world of sleep. While the
other "I", unconscious of itself, lies in sleep, its double is up
and doing. In other words, while the body of the sleeper lies
wrapped in slumber, motionless, the sleeper in his dream lives and
sees many strange and wonderful things. It is "himself" who does
this (of that there can be no doubt), and yet not the self known and
visible to himself and others; for that lies still as death beyond
the reach of sensation. It follows that there lives within a man a
second self, active in dreaming. That the dream experiences are
veritable realities and not empty fancies for Homer is also certain.
He never says, as later poets often do, that the dreamer "thought"
he saw this or that. The figures seen in dreams are real figures,
either of the gods themselves or a "dream spirit" sent by them, or a
fleeting "image" (eidôlon) that they allow to appear for a moment.
Just as the dreamer's capacity for vision is no mere fancy, so, too,
the objects that he sees are realities. In the same way it is
something real that appears to a man asleep as the shape of a person
lately dead. Since this shape can show itself to a dreamer, it must
of necessity still exist; consequently it survives death, though,
indeed, only as a breath-like image, much as we have seen
reflections of our own faces mirrored in water.[6\1] It cannot,
indeed--this airy substance--be grasped or held like the once viable
self; and hence comes its name, the "psyche". The primeval argument
for such a counterpart of man is repeated by Achilleus himself
(_Il._ xxiii, 103 f.) when his dead friend appears to him and then
vanishes again: so, then, ye Gods, there yet lives in Hades' house a
psyche and shadowy image (of man), but there is no midriff in it
(and consequently none of the faculties which preserve the visible
man alive). {8}

The dreamer, then, and what he sees in his dream proves the
existence of an _alter ego_ in man.[7\1] Man, however, also observes
that his body may suffer a deathlike torpor without the second self
being occupied with dream experiences. In such moments of "swoon",
according to Greek thought and actual Homeric expression, "the
psyche has left the body."[8\1] Where had it gone? No man could
tell. But on this occasion it comes back again: whereupon the
"spirit is gathered again into the midriff". If ever, as happens in
the case of death, the psyche should become completely separated
from the visible body, then the "spirit" will never return. But the
psyche, which in those temporary separations from the body[9\1] did
not perish, will not vanish into nothingness now.

§ 3

So far experience takes us, from which primitive logic arrived at
very much the same conclusions all over the world. But, we may
proceed to ask, where does this liberated psyche go? What becomes of
it? Here begins "the undiscovered country" and it might appear that
at its entrance there was a complete parting of the ways.

Primitive people are accustomed to attribute unlimited powers to the
disembodied "soul"--powers all the more formidable because they are
not seen. Indeed, they refer in part _all_ invisible forces to the
action of "souls", and strain anxiously by means of the richest
offerings within their power to secure for themselves the goodwill
of these powerful spirits. Homer, on the contrary, knows nothing of
any influence exerted by the psyche upon the visible world, and,
consequently, hardly anything of a cult of the psyche. How, indeed,
could the souls (as I may venture to call them without further risk
of misunderstanding) have any such influence? They are all without
exception collected in the realm of Aïdes, far from the living,
separated from them by Okeanos and Acheron, guarded by the
relentless god himself, the inexorable doorkeeper. Only a fabled
hero like Odysseus may for once, perhaps, reach the entrance of that
gloomy kingdom alive: the souls themselves, once they have crossed
the river, never come back--so the soul of Patroklos assures his
friend. How do they get there? The implication seems to be that on
leaving the body the soul passes away, unwilling and complaining of
its fate, but, nevertheless, unresisting, to Hades; and after the
destruction of the body by fire, disappears for ever into the depths
of Erebos. It was only a {9} later poet who, in giving the final
touches to the Odyssey, introduced Hermes, the "Guide of the Dead".
Whether this is an invention of the poet's, or, as appears more
likely, it is borrowed from the ancient folk-belief of some remote
corner of Greece, in the completely rounded circle of Homeric belief
at any rate it is an innovation and an important one. Doubt has
arisen, it appears, whether indeed _all_ the souls must of necessity
pass away into the Unseen; and they are provided with a divine guide
who by his mysteriously compelling summons (_Od._ xxiv, 1) and the
power of his magic wand constrains them to follow him.[10\1]

Down in the murky underworld they now float unconscious, or, at
most, with a twilight half-consciousness, wailing in a shrill
diminutive voice, helpless, indifferent. Of course, flesh, bones,
and sinews,[11\1] the midriff, the seat of all the faculties of mind
and will--these are all gone for ever. They were attached to the
once-visible partner of the psyche, and that has been destroyed. To
speak of an "immortal life" of these souls, as scholars both ancient
and modern have done, is incorrect. They can hardly be said to
_live_ even, any more than the image does that is reflected in the
mirror; and that they prolong to eternity their shadowy
image-existence--where in Homer do we ever find this said? The
psyche may survive its visible companion, but it is helpless without
it. Is it possible to believe that a realistically imaginative,
materially minded people like the Greeks would have regarded as
immortal a creature incapable (once the funeral is over) of
requiring or receiving further _nourishment_--either in religious
cult or otherwise?

The daylight world of Homer is thus freed from spectres of the night
(for even in dreams the psyche is seen no more after the body is
burnt); from those intangible and ghostly essences at whose
unearthly activity the superstitious of every age tremble. The
living are no longer troubled by the dead. The world is governed by
the gods alone; not pale and ghostly phantoms, but palpable and
fully materialized figures, working powerfully everywhere, and
dwelling on the clear mountain tops: "and brightness gleams around
them." No daimonic powers can compare with the gods or can avail
against them; and night does not set free the departed souls of the
dead. The reader starts involuntarily and begins to suspect the
influence of another age, when in a part of Book XX of the Odyssey,
added by a later hand, he reads how shortly before the destruction
of the suitors the clairvoyant soothsayer beholds in hall and
forecourt the soul-phantoms (eidôla) {10} floating in multitudes and
hurrying down to the darkness under the earth: "the sun was darkened
in the heaven and a thick mist came over all." The later poet has
been very successful in suggesting the terror awakened by a
foreboding of tragedy; but such terror in the face of the doings of
the spirit world is entirely un-Homeric.

§ 4

Were the Greeks, then, always so untroubled by such fears of the
souls of the dead? Was there never any _cult_ of disembodied
spirits, such as was not only known to all primitive peoples
throughout the world, but was also quite familiar to nations
belonging to the same family as the Greeks, for instance, the
Indians and the Persians? The question and its answer have more than
a passing interest. In later times--long subsequent to Homer--we
find in Greece itself a lively worship of ancestors and a general
cult of the departed. Were it demonstrable--as it is generally
assumed without proof--that the Greeks only at this late period
first began to pay a religious cult to the souls of the dead, this
fact would give very strong support to the oft-repeated theory that
the cult of the dead arose from the ruins of a previous worship of
the gods. Anthropologists are accustomed to deny this and to regard
the worship of disembodied souls as one of the earliest forms (if
not as originally the only form) of the reverence paid to unseen
powers. The peoples, however, upon whose conditions of life and
mental conceptions such views are generally based, have indeed
behind them a long past, but no history. What is to prevent pure
speculation and theorizing in conformity with the preconceived idea
just mentioned (which is almost elevated to the position of a
doctrine of faith by some comparative religionists) from introducing
into the dim past of such savage peoples the primitive worship of
gods, out of which the worship of the dead may then subsequently
arise? But _Greek_ religious development can be traced from Homer
onwards for a long period; and there we find the certainly
remarkable fact that a cult of the dead, unknown to Homer, only
appears later, in the course of a long and vigorous expansion of
religious ideas in after times; or, at least, then shows itself more
plainly--but not, it is important to notice, as the precipitate of a
dying belief in gods and worship of the gods, but rather as a
collateral development by the side of that highly developed form of
piety.

Are we, then, really to believe that the cult of disembodied {11}
spirits was absolutely unknown to the Greeks of pre-Homeric times?

Such an assertion, if made without due qualification, is
contradicted by a closer study of the Homeric poems themselves.

It is true that Homer represents for us the earliest great stage in
the evolution of Greek civilization of which we have clear evidence.
But the poems do not stand at the beginning of that evolution.
Indeed, they only stand at the beginning of Greek Epic poetry--so
far as this has been transmitted to us--because the natural
greatness and wide popularity of the Iliad and the Odyssey secured
their preservation in writing. Their very existence and the degree
of artistic finish which they show, oblige us to suppose that behind
them lies a long history of heroic "Saga" poetry. The conditions
which they describe and imply point to a long course of previous
development--from nomadic to city life, from patriarchal rule to the
organization of the Greek Polis. And just as the maturity of
material development tells its tale, so do the refinement and
maturity of culture, the profound and untrammelled knowledge of the
world, the clarity and simplicity of thought reflected in them. All
these things go to show that before Homer, in order to reach Homer,
the Greek world must have thought and learned much--must, indeed,
have unlearned and undone much. As in art, so in all the products of
civilization, what is simple, appropriate, and convincing is not the
achievement of beginners, but the reward of prolonged study. It is
prima facie unthinkable that during the whole length of Greek
evolution before Homer, religion alone, the relationship between man
and the invisible world, should have remained stationary at any one
point. It is not from the comparison of religious beliefs and their
development among kindred nations, nor even from the study of
apparently primitive ideas and usages in the religious life of the
Greeks themselves of later times, that we are to seek the truth
about the religious customs of that remote period which is obscured
for us by the intervening mass of the Homeric poems. Comparative
studies of this kind are valuable in their way, but must only be
used to give further support to the insight derived from less easily
misleading methods of inquiry. For us the only completely
satisfactory source of information about pre-Homeric times is Homer
himself. We are allowed--indeed, we are forced--to conclude that
there have been change in conceptions and customs, if, in that
otherwise so uniform and rounded Homeric world, we meet with
isolated occurrences, customs, forms of speech that contradict the
{12} normal atmosphere of Homer and can only be explained by
reference to a world in all essentials differently orientated from
his own and for the most part kept in the background by Homer. All
that is necessary is to open our eyes, freed from preconceived
ideas, to the "rudiments" ("survivals", as they are better called by
English scholars) of a past stage of civilization discoverable in
the Iliad and Odyssey themselves.

§ 5

Such rudiments of a once vigorous soul-worship are not hard to find
in Homer. In particular, we may refer to what the Iliad tells us of
the manner in which the dead body of Patroklos is dealt with. The
reader need only recall the general outline of the story. In the
evening of the day upon which Hektor has been slain, Achilles with
his Myrmidons sings the funeral dirge to his dead friend: they go
three times in procession round the body, Achilles laying his
"murderous hands" on the breast of Patroklos and calling upon him
with the words: "Hail, Patroklos mine, even in Aïdes'
dwelling-place; what I vowed to thee before is now performed; Hektor
lies slain and is the prey of dogs, and twelve noble Trojan youths
will I slay at thy funeral pyre." After they have laid aside their
arms he makes ready the funeral feast for his companions--bulls,
sheep, goats, and pigs are killed, "and all around, in beakers-full,
the blood flowed round the corpse." During the night the soul of
Patroklos appears to Achilles demanding immediate burial. In the
morning the host of the Myrmidons marches out in arms, bearing the
body in their midst. The warriors lay locks of their hair, cut off
for the purpose, upon the body, and last of all Achilles places his
own hair in the hand of his friend--it was once pledged by his
father to Spercheios the River-god, but Patroklos must now take it
with him, since return to his home is denied to Achilles. The
funeral pyre is got ready, many sheep and oxen slaughtered. The
corpse is wrapped in their fat, while their carcasses are placed
beside it; jars of oil and honey are set round the body. Next, four
horses are killed, two dogs belonging to Patroklos, and last of all
twelve Trojan youths taken prisoner for this purpose by Achilles.
All these are burnt together with the corpse, and Achilles spends
the whole night pouring out dark wine upon the earth, calling the
while upon the psyche of Patroklos. Only when morning comes is the
fire extinguished with wine; the bones of Patroklos are collected
and laid in a golden casket and entombed within a mound. {13}

Here we have a picture of the funeral of a chieftain which, in the
solemnity and ceremoniousness of its elaborate detail, is in
striking conflict with the normal Homeric conception of the
nothingness of the soul after its separation from the body. A full
and rich sacrifice is here offered to such a soul. This sacrifice is
inexplicable if the soul immediately upon its dissolution flutters
away insensible, helpless and powerless, and therefore incapable of
enjoying the offerings made to it. It is therefore not unnatural
that a method of interpretation which isolates Homer as far as
possible and adheres closely to his own fixed and determinate range
of ideas, should attempt to deny the sacrificial character of the
offerings made on this occasion.[12\1] We may well ask, however,
what else but a sacrifice, i.e. a repast offered in satisfaction of
the needs of the person honoured (in this case the psyche), can be
intended by this stream of blood about the corpse; this slaughtering
and burning of cattle and sheep, horses and dogs, and finally of
twelve Trojan prisoners on or at the funeral pyre? To explain it all
as a mere performance of pious duties, as is often done in
interpreting many of the gruesome pictures of Greek sacrificial
ceremonies, is impossible here. Besides, Homer often tells us of
merely pious observances in honour of the dead, and they are of a
very different character. And the most horrible touch of all (the
human sacrifice is not put in simply to satisfy Achilles' lust for
vengeance--twice over does Achilles call to the soul of Patroklos
with the words: "To _you_ do I bring what I formerly promised to
_you_" (_Il._ xxiii, 20 ff., 180 ff.).[13\1] The whole series of
offerings on this occasion is precisely of the kind which we may
take as typical of the oldest sort of sacrificial ritual such as we
often find in later Greek religion in the cultus of the infernal
deities. The sacrificial offerings are completely burnt in honour of
the Daimon and are not shared between the bysta